---
date: 2025-06-07
---

# Spiritual bypassing

_The only way out is through._

_You can't put the genie back in the bottle._

<!-- more -->

In [_Transformation_][transformation], the Jungian therapist Robert A. Johnson
talks about three levels of consciousness: two-, three- and four-dimensional
man. I think — if brought up-to-date, translating “man" into person etc. — that
this can be quite a useful concept. It's certainly helping to illuminate some of
the more frustrating aspects of my current experience.

Two-dimensional man is primitive, simple, naïve. And happy. Frolicking in the
garden of Eden without a care in the world. There are very few two-dimensional
men (people) now. A nice example is Peter Sellers' character Chance the gardener
in _Being There_. Also some members of traditional cultures who have very little
contact with the outside world. Two-dimensional people are able to live with the
same quality of simplicity that we usually associate with animals, spontaneously
experiencing their full range of emotions, uncensored, open, honest,
straightforward, living in the present moment.

Three-dimensional man has knowledge and technology, he thinks about the past and
the future, he has science and philosophy and politics and culture. And he is
anxious and unhappy, disconnected from nature and from himself, from his
instinct, his sex, his emotions, and his power. Almost all of us live like this,
including many who claim not to.

Four-dimensional man is enlightened, able to hold, encompass, transcend all the
complexity and subtlety of the modern world, but unburdened of the anxiety. Able
to live simply, happily. The path there is long and difficult, painful:
self-actualisation, spiritual growth, self-knowledge, transcendence.

None of us is happy in the three-dimensional world. We all want a way out. We
crave the simplicity, the happiness, the sense of oneness with nature, the
fulfilment, the honesty, the open-heartedness that is shared by the
two-dimensional and four-dimensional. But we can't seem to find it.

Many seek to go back to the two-dimensional. Back to nature, embracing
traditional cultures, ceremonies, dancing, ritual, drugs, free love. Renouncing
the modern world. Getting caught up in cults and conspiracies. Rejecting
“consensus reality" while uncritically joining in the groupthink of their tribe.
Denouncing technology while glued to their mobile phones. Railing against
mainstream medicine while walking around with bionic hips and knees.

I think this is a form of spiritual bypassing. It doesn't work. The myths are
right. You can't put the genie back in the bottle. Once you've opened Pandora's
box, you can't stuff everything back in and close it again. Once you've tasted
the fruit, you're forever cast out of the garden.

I believe the only way out is through. Therapy, meditation, deep group work.
Maybe psychedelics? Parts work, that started with inner child work, but has
expanded to embrace more different inner parts, and is now sometimes called
internal family systems. Bring all the parts together. Unify them. Reject
nothing. Have the strength, subtlety, empathy, and wisdom to hold the
contradictions, to encompass them. And the same in the outside world, in our
relationships with other people, and with “the system". Purity is an illusion,
unattainable. Let he who is without sin cast the first stone, and so on.

Maybe Descartes set this all back a few hundred years with the whole mind-body
duality thing? By living in our heads, ignoring and neglecting our bodies, we've
developed technology with no soul. Cold. Based on limited thinking, ignoring
wider context. I started to write “functional" here, but it's not even that,
it's purely focussed on short-term profit. And look where all that has gotten
us: a planet in conflict, on the verge of destruction, war among humans and war
against nature. Population explosion, pollution, inequality, suffering,
imbalance, destruction... But is technology itself the problem here?

I'm convinced, more and more, that this isn't an either-or situation. It's not
about head vs heart. We need both. Working together. I like the idea of the
dialectic: thesis, antithesis, synthesis. Here the thesis is two-dimensional
man: nature, body, heart, simplicity. The antithesis is three-dimensional man:
science, technology, anxiety and dissociation, split off from nature, the
pendulum swinging too far. And the transcendent synthesis we're looking for is
four-dimensional man: head, heart and body working together, in harmony
internally, and with nature, and with each other.

I was away last weekend at the first seminar of the 18-month [Living Tantra
training][ltt16] with Jan Day and Frieder Fischer. I had two profound
experiences in the morning meditations.

On the second morning, during the quiet part of the meditation, my thoughts
drifted off into thinking about one of my current fascinations, the arrangement
of the scales in pine cones, how the Fibonacci numbers emerge almost magically.
And then I realised I'd drifted off into thinking and immediately started to
beat myself up about being bad at meditation, too easily distracted, wasting my
time... And _then_ I had a moment, a revelation. This “thinking” came from my
free child, from his sense of wonder, curiosity, excitement. He was reminding me
of his existence, and demanding not to be forgotten, left behind. This aspect of
my inner child definitely lives in my head, in thoughts, theories, mathematics,
science... but he's also in my body and my heart, in that sense of wonder,
fascination, delight. For my own personal journey, I absolutely need to bring
that part along.

And more generally, it's not thinking that's the problem, it's thinking divorced
from feeling. It's the economist whose theories only consider money, divorced
from the human and natural context. It's the pursuit of short-term profit. It's
the scientist or technologist who ignores everything except a reductionist focus
on one tiny detail. It's single-minded obsession, goal-orientation.

On the final morning, during the progression upward through the chakras, when we
reached the third eye, the eyebrow centre, the guiding words talked about
connecting with the world, nature and other people, sending my light out and
receiving the universe's energy back in. And I suddenly had a crystal clear
vision of a world in harmony. People living in small settlements surrounded by,
interwoven with nature _and_ technology, all interconnected. I saw our planet
turning, the sun, planets, stars, and galaxies... and I saw a village and nearby
a clearing in the forest, and a huge oak tree, and under it a naked woman with
long brown hair dancing. And I looked into her eyes and I saw the galaxies
again, the entire universe. In harmony.

[transformation]:
    https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/Transformation/ouPlDUNeGzcC?hl=en&gbpv=0

[ltt16]: https://www.janday.com/workshops/living-tantra-training-2021-2022/
