---
layout: post
title: "Magic"
categories: 
---

This is about the magic that we---well most of us---do every day.

We have an idea, a thought, an impulse, a desire... something strikes us, we
dream something... and then we make it real.

It seems simple and obvious, but it's not. At least, it hasn't been for me. So
often these urges get blocked at the source, and never see expression. And that
has been going on for so long, so many years, that often I don't even feel the
initial impulse. And so I live my life as an empty shell of a man. Nice enough,
competent, but boring, lacking in imagination, energy, drive, spark... It's been
the bane of my life.

But this morning, miracle of miracles, all of
a sudden I could definitely smell raisin toast. I asked, "Do you smell
that?". Nothing. It was all in my mind. Something inside me telling me that I
wanted raisin toast for breakfast. And so---after a bit of a struggle
because my tendency has always been to ignore these impulses when I am aware of
them, and in the manner of my parents to come up with all sorts of sensible,
rational reasons not to act on the impulse---I went into the kitchen and put two
slices of the raisin loaf (actually it was a German Stollen that perhaps didn't
quite work out, but was delicious anyway) into the toaster, and made that
imaginary smell into a reality.

It tasted good. And it felt good too.

And I should have taken a photo of it on the plate, with a mug of mocha next to
it, and posted it here, but I was too greedy and by the time I thought of it, it
was all gone.
