---
layout: post
title: "GitHub"
categories: Gratitude
---

I am grateful for GitHub, that enables me to host this journal.

I only realised today that the GitHub web interface has a built-in editor that I can use to write on this blog from any computer anywhere. That's what I'm doing right now.

But seriously, how amazing is that. This is my journal, my blog, and it's hosted on a server somewhere---I have no idea where---and it's all stored as simple plain text files written in Markdown, and turned into beautiful (if I say so myself) web pages automatically by Jekyll software running on GitHub's servers, updated whenever I make any changes without me having to do anything, and served up to web browsers anywhere in the world for others to read. I think that's quite extraordinary.

And it's all free. What's their business model?

Everything is stored in a Git repository, under version control, so I can revert back to any old version of any file if I screw something up. I can pull copies of the complete repository onto any computer I like, so there's no risk of ever losing anything. The tools that programmers have been using and developing for decades are finally getting used for electronic publishing. (Something I was thinking about for a while.)

While I'm being grateful for GitHub, why not put in a kind word for DropBox too? DropBox has changed my life. Ten years ago, I remember having to email files to my home address to work on them. I remember putting files on floppy disks and memory sticks. I remember constantly getting confused about which version of something was the latest. I remember using rsync to move files back and forth to create a mirror at home of what I had at work, and needing to remember to run my sync script at the start and end of each work session at home. I remember getting to work and realising that I'd forgotten to sync when I finished something late the night before... What a drag. Now everything is on DropBox, and that's all there is to it. I see the same file system on every computer I use. It's all available on my phone too, if I want it. It all synchronises silently in the background.

And that's free too. One day, particularly if I keep on taking photos, I'll run out of free space and I'll have to pay them something. But by then perhaps I'll have moved everything to one of the open source DropBox alternatives, hosted somewhere I can control, so that I satisfy more of Jon Udell's principles of thinking like the web.
