---
title: Bach
layout: post
categories: Gratitude
---

I am grateful for the music of Johann Sebastian Bach, a pleasure that has endured since I was small, and has deepened and intensified over the years.

When I was a boy learning the piano, Bach was like a puzzle, a challenge. How to make my hands play two, and three and four different melodies simultaneously? How to keep all those threads running in my brain at the same time, to make the weaker, clumsier left hand ring out with the same authority as the right?

Later I found myself getting lost, as in a form of meditation, in the forward pulse of the music, feeling rather than truly hearing or understanding the voices weaving in and out of each other, moving apart and then back together, creating harmony as each made its independent way. I was never attracted to serious analysis of the music: harmony, counterpoint and so on, but I listened to Gustav Leonhardt's recording of the Well-Tempered Clavier hundreds of times without ever getting bored.

And now, more than forty years on, what I hear, as another layer, on top of everything else, is the passion, the emotion, the yearning, the gratitude, resignation, joyful celebration of life. I don't believe in Bach's Lutheran god, but I can identify with the spiritual devotion expressed in his music. 

Here's a beautiful example: <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y3lRdb5BSGA>. Seventh movement (soprano aria) from Cantata BWV 36 "Schwingt freudig euch empor" (Soar joyfully aloft), performed by the J. S. Bach Foundation of St Gallen under Rudolf Lutz. Soloists: Nuria Rial (soprano) und John Holloway (violin).

There are plenty more where that came from.

