---
title: Trauma
layout: post
categories: [Gratitude, Psychology]
---

I am grateful for any insight into my own life, however painful it may be.

At least, I try to be. Sometimes parts of me want to reject uncomfortable information, but in the end gratitude is the only reasonable response. Otherwise what am I? Life has to be grounded in truth. Fantasy has its uses, but escaping into it is not the way.

Read this:

> What does trauma do to the brain?
>
> Severe or repeated trauma can re-route emergency systems that are meant to be used only occasionally, and leaves them active, like a switch stuck in the “on” position. This can shrink or damage the part of the brain that thinks and plans, and potentially damages the brain’s ability to feel love and safety in the presence of others.
>
> To deal with this pain and stress, the individual may become more rigid and inflexible in his or her thinking and develop tunnel vision and selective listening. Over time to compensate for the damage done to the short term memory and ability to sequence by continued exposure to our fight or flight response, or allostasis, the individual may develop rituals, become rigid and controlling or “oppositional”, shut down, withdraw, rage, retreat into a special place, or become over-involved in things that help the individual to escape.
>
> ---Lara Palay, _Autism and Trauma: Calming Anxious Brains_, Center for Systems Change, 2012

While I don't think there's too much wrong with the part of me that thinks and plans, I can certainly identify with the bit about damage to "… the brain's ability to feel love and safety in the presence of others." Ouch.

It terrifies me to think that this might be permanent. I give thanks for this fear that motivates me to continue the struggle to grow and heal and live life fully.
