---
title: Haircut
layout: post
categories: Gratitude
---

I had my hair cut today.

I don't have all that much hair left, especially on top, so I just get it
buzzed: clippers set to Number 1. It feels lovely running my hand over it when
it's just been done. I am grateful for that sensation and the pleasure it gives
me.

Actually getting the haircut is a pleasure too. Interesting... It didn't used to
be. The whole process used to be filled with anxiety. Appearance was so
important. I was so insecure and self-conscious. Terrified that somehow my new
haircut would draw attention to me, mark me out for more humiliations. And even
after I left school, the same fears hung around for decades. I think I behaved
in a pretty unbearable way to anyone who cut my hair.

Now that every cut is pretty much exactly the same because it's done with the
clippers, all that anxiety has gone. I know exactly how I'll look afterwards: a
tiny bit older and uglier than last time. So I can finally just relax and let it
happen. And there's something nice about that: letting go, putting myself in
someone else's hands. It's only very recently that I've really been able to do
that.

I could speculate that this is some sort of regression to early childhood. And I
might wonder---a little unkindly perhaps---if that's tapping in to some deep
yearning for being a baby again and being taken care of by women. I guess that
could easily be unhealthy, a symptom of a refusal to grow up, something to do
with wanting to go back to being a little prince, a bit like the baby Jesus,
helpless, worshipped and cared for in every way by all-powerful mother-figures.
That makes the whole thing seem a bit yucky... An adult man should take care of
his own inner child, not expect anyone else to indulge him.

But maybe it's not quite that bad. And after all it's only ten minutes once a
month.
