---
title: Graham
layout: post
categories: Gratitude
---

This is to express my thanks to Graham Tilly, who was a big influence on
me in childhood.

Graham was my father's friend, at least to the extent that my father has
friends at all. When I was small, they used to go sailing together every
Sunday during summer, in my father's Heron dinghy. Both families would
go down to the eastern end of Balmoral Beach (in Sydney). Dad and Graham
would rig the boat and then go out and take part in the race, part of
Balmoral Sailing Club. The rest of us---mum, Judy & me, and Graham's
wife Helen and two daughters Deirdre & Caroline---would spend the day on
the beach playing, swimming, climbing the Moreton Bay fig trees...

Graham was totally unlike my father. Where Dad is thin, Graham was
strong. Where Dad is reserved and quiet, I remember Graham as exuberant,
filled with energy and enthusiasm. Where Dad was hairless, Graham was
covered in curly hair. Where Dad came across as asexual, Graham clearly
enjoyed Helen and liked women in general.

Both my father and Graham were amateur woodworkers. Dad made detailed
plans and followed them precisely. Graham was far more skilled and
creative. He mad a head for their bed that was carved with the faces of
his family. He made toys for his daughters. It was all beautiful and
alive, where what Dad made seemed dead, cold.

Mum thought Graham was a sexist pig, a dinosaur. She couldn't stand him.
I grew up split between, on the one hand, my attraction to Graham,
probably based on my intuitive knowledge that Dad wasn't a suitable role
model for a young boy growing up, and on the other hand my mother's
contempt for him.

By the time I was eight or nine, this stopped. We moved to Northbridge
Sailing Club where I had my own boat. We hardly saw them any more.
Graham and Helen separated and Mum continued her friendship with Helen,
but he was out of the picture.

I think I saw him again, in about 1991, at the dinner to mark my father's
retirement from the mathematics department at the University of Sydney.
Graham taught there too. He was always a second-class citizen in the
department because he didn't have his PhD. I vaguely remember him
telling me how my father was respected for his achievements, something
like that.

When I knew him, I wasn't really aware of any of my own internal turmoil
about this. I listened to what my parents said. I observed. But I had no
idea about feelings like being attracted to a man who had some qualities
that my own father lacked. Of wanting to grow up like him. Of wanting
him to be my father. All of that came many years later, on my NWTA, when
I realised that my golden place, the safe place where my inner child can
go for kindness and comfort, was a toymaker's workshop, where a big,
golden man with curly hair---not just on his head and in his beard, but
also on his arms and legs---was happily working among the wood shavings,
making big mugs of cocoa, whistling to himself. And even after that it
was months before I realised that the golden toymaker is modelled on
Graham.

Now I don't even know if Graham is alive or dead. It's been more than
twenty years since I saw him, and I guess he'd be over eighty by now.
Wherever you are Graham, I thank you for giving me a vision of what a
man can be: happy, alive, imperfect, full of energy.
