---
title: Brahms
layout: post
categories: Gratitude
---

I am grateful for the Brahms piece I heard on the radio this morning. I was humming and whistling it to myself all day.

And I'm grateful for romantic music in general. It's fashionable to sneer at the romantic period as shallow and too emotional, sentimental. I don't care. I like it. I don't think the main problems in the world are because we express our emotions too much. Quite the opposite. I think the denigration of romantic music is some sort of new puritanism.

If music makes people feel something, I think that's a good thing, and romantic music was written specifically to do that, to tug at the heartstrings, to move the spirits, to trigger emotions: sadness, joy, regret, patriotism…

(OK, OK, I agree, we can do without that last one. The exception that proves the rule perhaps?)

I think there's a lot of snobbishness about not liking Brahms or Chopin or Liszt or Schubert or Schumann or Tchaikovsky or… Of all the so-called "classical" music, this is the most accessible for people without a formal musical education, without having spent years learning to play an instrument and absorbing the forms and norms and conventions of the genre and all its different sub-genres from different historical periods. Why be elitist about it? That's just narcissism. "I'm special because I like Shostakovitch that nobody else is clever enough to understand." Spare me. I can't stand Shostakovitch. Sorry if that makes me an ignorant uncultured pleb.

I don't know Brahms well, so I had to look it up on the BBC Radio 3 playlist. It turns out that it was the Hungarian Dance No. 1 in G minor. Here's Barenboim conducting the Berliner Philharmoniker. (You could surely do worse.) The sound seemed a bit muffled to me, but you can at least get the idea. Less than four minutes. Worth it.

<iframe width="640" height="480" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/vHCTa1QNnso" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

There are lots of other versions: the original for piano four hands, one for solo violin and piano, perhaps something for solo piano, or maybe that's just some super-virtuoso playing the four hands version with only two hands.