---
title: Autism
layout: post
categories: Gratitude
---

Avid readers will have noticed that I've taken a break here for the last month.
That more or less coincides with discovering that I am mildly autistic.

Pause for reaction... Shock? Or more likely, "Duh! We've known that for ages.
How come you didn't?"

For years I've cursed my bad luck growing up with an autistic father. I think
it's clear that he's a fair bit further along the spectrum than me. It's also
very clear the damage that an autistic parent can do to the developing brain of
a small child. (Same applies to parents with a personality disorder.) Read
Daniel Siegel's owrk on child development, for example _Parenting from the
inside out_. He's written other more recent books too. So my theory for why I've
had so much trouble in my life was that I had a form of PTSD from childhood
trauma caused by my father's inability to connect with me emotionally. (Not his
fault of course. Like me, he can't help it.) Similar but different issues with
my mother, but I don't want to go into that now.

I've joked about all the years I spent in university mathematics and computer
science departments, among all the weird autistic men. So it's a bit humbling to
find out that I am, after all that, one of them.

But I'm also grateful. Because at last everything makes sense.

All my strange little quirks suddenly make sense. Each one means nothing by
itself. Just a quirk. Everyone has them. But add them all up, and suddenly it's
a pattern, and quite a clear one.

All my difficulties with relationships make sense too.

My problems with employers...

What the hell, here's the list I've put together, so far. I'm probably missing
things, some that I've just forgotten and others that I might not be aware of
yet but that others would know.

 1. Repeated failure of intimate relationships. I've left a trail of unhappy,
    confused women behind me, baffled as to why they ended up feeling lonely
    with me.
 2. Several occasions when I’ve inadvertently offended someone.
 3. Extreme sensitivity to sound. Little things like a rattle in the car or a
    squeaky chair can drive me nuts. Also things like the television being too
    loud.
 4. Great difficulty separating speech from background noise, especially if it’s
    someone else speaking, or the television. And in movies or TV, difficulty
    following the dialogue if there's music or sound effects at the same time. I
    almost always feel like the sound level for the dialogue is too low compared
    to the level for the music.
 5. I was bullied at school, not actually beaten up, but terrorised. I wonder
    how much of it was my own fears?
 6. From a young age, I have always felt that other people knew something I
    didn’t, that there was some great secret that everyone else was in on, but
    that I was left out of.
 7. I've been depressed since age 11 or 12.
 8. I have great difficulty concentrating on something that doesn’t interest me.
 9. Other people feel like I have a wall around me, that I'm untouchable.
10. I hate it when the phone rings. I don’t like calling others on the phone
    either. Now some of that might be related to my difficulties with auditory
    processing, but I think there's more as well, perhaps related to the next
    item.
11. I have some difficulty reading faces or tones of voice. For example I tend
    to think people are angry with me even if they’re not. I compensate for some
    of this by using my brain to figure it out, where normal people just know.
    For example, I was able to score very high on that faces and voices test
    from Cambridge. For the voices I was able to work out the correct answers
    from the content of what they said, not from the tone of voice. For the
    facial expressions I was mostly able to figure them out by a process of
    elimination by looking at the answers. So while I was able to get the right
    answers, I probably took much longer than a normal person who "just knew".
12. I have always suffered from social anxiety---shyness in other words.
13. I can’t stand parties.
14. I am talented in mathematics and computer science.
15. I suffer a lot from awkwardness, not knowing what to do or say.
16. I have great difficulty with time and priority management. I can’t multitask
    at all.
17. Spent a lot of energy trying to be normal.
18. I get a lot of anxiety about uncertainty---I seem to need to know what’s
    going to happen.
19. People sometimes think I’m fierce when I’m really not at all. So I guess
    that's kind of the reverse of my difficulty reading other people. I'm also
    not giving off the right kind of emotional signals, so other people aren't
    always aware of my emotional state.
20. I find cruelty, nastiness and dishonesty incomprehensible and confusing.
    Since being bullied at school I’m fearful and expect it. Despite _not_ being
    bullied for many years, I still automatically go there; in other words, my
    brain seems to have gotten fixed in that fearful state and no amount of kind
    treatment seems to be able to shift me out of it.
21. I scored 34 on the Cambridge AQ test.
22. I’ve tried to learn not to interrupt in conversations, but I still do it
    sometimes. I also struggle with not being able to find a gap in which to
    speak. Even with just one other person, but more so when there are several.
    I find the dynamics of conversation confusing.
23. I crave company, kindness, gentleness but apparently don’t know how to
    reciprocate or generate a mutual state of intimacy.
24. I suffer from fear/panic when someone comes really close emotionally, even
    if I want them to.
25. When I get upset about something, people think I go on about it too long.
    For example, on the few occasions when I’ve had a grievance against my
    employer and complained, I’ve ended up making too much of it, making a
    federal case out of it.
26. I don’t know where to put my hands/arms.
27. Recently I have found myself wringing my hands frequently while speaking.
28. I have difficulty expressing emotions.
29. I lack spontaneity.
30. I find change exhausting.
31. I find social interaction exhausting.
32. I get extremely upset by false accusations against me, or people
    misunderstanding me.
33. I have a tendency to get fixed on an idea and then be unable to process
information that contradicts it.

OK, so that's my list so far. I think it paints a picture.

I still don't know what to make of all this. It's been about a month and I'm
still very much in turmoil.

Part of me absolutely isn't grateful for this. Not at all. I want to protest. I
want to fight. This feels like a life sentence. It's not fair. I want to shout
that I'm just as good as other people and don't treat me as any less because of
this. And that's because I do think that I'm less than others because of this.
I'm furious. Raging. I want to blame someone. I want retribution.

I'm distraught, because I think this means that I'm excluded from a lot of what
I have been striving for. True intimacy, connection with others.

But I'm also grateful.

I'm grateful because at last this brings the pattern into clear view, and now
what was once confusing and frightening, now makes sense. I'm also grateful for
the selfish reason that it lets me off the hook. All my shortcomings aren't my
fault. I'm not a bad person. I'm not lazy, or not trying hard enough. I'm not
being difficult. This is who I am.

There's another reason for gratitude, an important one. It's related to the
Paradoxical Theory of Change:

> "Change occurs when one becomes what he is, not when he tries to become what
> he is not."

I've spent my whole life trying to convince myself and others that I'm normal,
and in so doing I think I've adopted rigid patterns, held myself back, lived out
of half-acknowledged fears. Whether it's "hard-wired" or whether I have the
brain plasticity to change this, it feels like an important part of my process
is accepting that, at least for now, this is who I am. Putting that another way,
autism (or its symptoms, or whatever...) has been in my shadow all my life. Now
it's out in the light.

