---
title: "Inspiration"
layout: post
categories: Gratitude
---

I am grateful for the inspiration I get from seeing other people's growth and recovery, and their commitment to learning and to helping others.

Yesterday Avigail gave a workshop in Inverness about PTSD and trauma for therapists. I helped out a bit, taking care of the participants when they arrived, changing the slides while she was speaking, offering practical or emotional support to anyone who needed it. There were twenty-four participants, hanging on her every word. There was a buzz in the room during the experiential exercises. The feedback was excellent. I felt proud of her. I have a feeling that this is just the start, that this workshop will be followed by others, and that they will be repeated, first in Inverness, then elsewhere in Scotland, and eventually around the world. Truly this is groundbreaking, earth-shattering, world-changing stuff. All therapists need to do these workshops.

I am grateful for the feelings of hope that this gave me. Hope for the world, that is, not so much for myself. Often all I can see around me is stupidity and ignorance. Most people don't seem to care about anything except themselves, and they actively reject any information that might make them uncomfortable. The world is hurtling headlong towards environmental disaster. Governments and corporations and even public bodies treat ordinary people with contempt, and ignore and dismiss the warning signs with contempt. There is trauma everywhere, and people behaving like... well, the normal phrase would be "like animals", but no animals behave with the mindless ferocity and barbarity of humans... so, ummm, people behaving like psychopaths, I guess. The way I see, it most major decisions are being made from a place of trauma psychology, which is where you see greed, selfishness and lack of care for other beings, human and non-human. If our decision-makers aren't actually disordered (psychopaths, borderlines, narcissists) then they're almost all working from trauma psychology. The clearest example is Israel, but it's the same everywhere else, just not quite so extreme. Climate change, refugees, welfare cuts and austerity, bankers' bonuses, taxing the poor and giving "incentives" to the rich, despoiling the natural world, treating animals with unspeakable cruelty. The list goes on and on. But I digress…

In the field of psychotherapy, counselling, personal growth, there's generally not much light either. On the one hand you have the hard-line, official stance that treats psychological problems according to the medical model, whose primary aim is to make profits for the drug companies and has no care for human suffering. And on the other hand you have the so-called New Age movement, which unfortunately dismisses all science and proceeds in an awfully flaky way, clutching ineffectually at straws like crystals and auras, meditation and mindfulness. Who knows, there may be something real there---and there certainly is with meditation and mindfulness---but on the whole the hippies confuse means and ends, and instead of healing and coming back to the world stronger and more mature and more able to engage, they seem content to remove themselves from the world and live in a dream world, detached, ultimately uncaring, and---very like the super-rich---living their own selfish little lives apart, while leaving the rest of humanity to rot.

So it was inspiring to see the way the people at the workshop engaged with the subject, and to hear from them how they're committed to helping others heal from trauma. I'm reminded that there are good people in the world, people who are actively trying to heal themselves and others, and some who were lucky enough to grow up with no significant childhood trauma at all.

I think that's rare. Perhaps that's just my bias, my depressed, bitter, twisted view of the world, but it's generally been my impression that the untraumatised, who grew up with psychologically healthy parents in relatively peaceful surroundings, are a small and fortunate minority.

This is an inspiring time for psychotherapy. For the first time, it's possible to link hard science---knowledge and understanding gained from brain scans: positron emission tomography, functional magnetic resonance imaging etc.---with subjective experience. Therapists like Avigail are using this knowledge to work in a way that is more effective than ever before, and it's possible to understand *why* people are the way they are, and *why* therapy works, in a way that no longer relies either on metaphors or on dodgy statistics.

The news is good: experiential, humanistic therapies work; cognitive behavioural therapy does not, and neither do drugs. Good therapy builds new neural pathways in the brain. As we've known all along, the client has to do the hard work. The purpose of therapy---always something vague and a bit unsatisfactory---can now be restated solidly as brain integration. This unifies the disparate visions of the different modalities: self-actualisation, differentiation, internal locus of control… They all mean the same thing: brain integration is a unifying common explanation for everything.

After lunch, Avigail played a video of an interview with one of her clients, a survivor of horrific trauma that started in early childhood and continued well into adulthood. Most of the participants were in tears. I was moved when the client said that her first session with Avigail was the first time anyone had ever believed her.

And reflecting on that, is when I stopped feeling so good about everything. There's hope for the world: most of Avigail's clients are getting better, and the twenty-four participants at the workshop learned a lot and were inspired to learn more and improve the way they work and to join her in really helping their clients.

But…

For me, the prognosis doesn't seem so good. In my journey the problem hasn't been getting people to believe me, it's been believing it myself. Despite everything I've heard from therapists and others close to me, I've always felt like what happened to me, and the way I feel about it, wasn't really that bad, and that I should just get on with it, just get over it, stop being such a wimp, so weak, stop feeling sorry for myself, just show a bit of spine, a bit of motivation, energy, confidence... I know that's my mother's voice, and I've been trying for years to replace it with a kind, loving, accepting voice, to care for the traumatised young parts of myself that never feel good enough and never feel like I have a right to anything, that never have confidence to act, to make decisions, to stand up and be seen. That's partly what this blog is about.

The sad thing for me is that it's possible that I'm beyond help. For some people, early childhood trauma causes damage to the brain that *can't* be fixed in therapy. The prefrontal cortex never develops properly and the person simply can't "grow up". The older I get, the longer I struggle with this, without success, the more I find myself forgetting important things, getting intense frontal lobe headaches whenever I try to do emotional work… the more I have to wonder.

I'm grateful for the opportunity to see others grow and be inspired, but I feel sick and bitter and angry that I'm not able to be part of that. A bit sorry for myself, to be honest.

And of course the "right" response would be to be positive, to accept that for some people it takes longer, to take that inspiration and use it to motivate me to work harder, to be more committed to internal self-care, vertical integration, remembering that in order to achieve change you need concentration and repetition and consistency. And above all I haven't been consistent.

*Later: I can see, reading over this, that the last four paragraphs weren't written from/by my "captain", the prefrontal cortex, but by an angry, frightened, teenager part of me, deep inside my limbic system.*

In fact I have observed changes in myself recently. I've become more able to catch myself as I descend into the vortex of past trauma. I've been able to report on emotional triggers and my internal responses, rather than acting on them. This even happened yesterday evening, after the workshop. I guess that's improved awareness, and that's a hugely important thing.

It's not the whole story, and this is where even Gestalt therapy gets it wrong: beyond awareness, you need internal action to heal and achieve integration. Awareness alone is not enough. But I'm starting to make progress there too. Although my first instinct when triggered is still to interrogate: "Why am I feeling like this?", I'm sometimes---particularly when prompted---able to put that aside and just take care of the part that's feeling. And that produces results. Flashbacks that would have lasted days, even a few weeks ago, are now over in hours or even minutes. Sometimes. So maybe there's hope for me yet.

