---
title: Deer
layout: post
categories: Gratitude
---

I saw that deer again tonight.

At least, that's my story. Why would it be a different one? We have a bond, that
deer and I, ever since I nearly killed it with the car a month ago.

So I was driving home, nearly there, at 7:30 or so, after staying back late for
the college open evening. And as I was about to enter the woods near Wester
Galcantray, I got that feeling, "Slow down, there are animals about, don't want
to hit them with the car." So I was driving slowly as I entered the trees.
Nothing on the road, and then I saw movement to my right, just off the road, on
a little sort of mound. And sure enough, it was a deer's white bottom. I
couldn't even see the whole animal, the way the light was, but I slowed down
even more, and then it disappeared off into the darkness.

I don't believe in the supernatural. What the hell does that mean anyway?
Anything that exists is "natural", right? But I do believe that there are things
in this world---this universe---that we don't understand properly yet. And these
ESP type links with other living things, whether it's other humans or whether
it's wild animals, or whether it's sharing dreams with a cat while curled up
asleep together on a sofa... Well why not? Why go through all sorts of mental
contortions in order to deny my experience? What would Ockham's Razor say?
What's the simplest explanation? That there's something going on, perfectly
natural, but we just don't understand it yet. Simple. And beautiful. The link
between us and nature is strong and nourishing and sometimes surprising. And for
that I'm grateful.
