---
title: Union
layout: post
categories: Gratitude
---

I am grateful for the existence of trades unions, and for having the freedom to
join one and participate in the great struggle between bosses and workers.

The state of industrial relations is pretty dire at the moment. So many of the
rights and freedoms that our parents and grandparents fought for have been
slowly stripped away over the last thirty years or so. I find it a bit
depressing. Bosses get to decide what union they will recognise. A lot of
industrial action is illegal. The pendulum has swung so far back towards the
situation that existed before there were any unions, that union has become a
dirty word. The corporate press somehow twisted things so that unionists are
always someone else, some mythical minority of powerful bullies who are holding
the rest of society to ransom, harming everyone else for the sake of their own
petty greed. Meanwhile the standard of living for working people drops and
drops, so that many honest hardworking people can't afford the basic
necessities.

Luckily I'm not in that situation, but since I started at the college in 2010
we've had a grand total of one pay rise of 1%, while the cumulative effect of
inflation has been to reduce the value of the pound by about 12%. In other
words, our real incomes have dropped by somewhere around 11% in that time. I
can't write too much, because my contract has all sorts of gagging clauses, but
I think what I've written is common knowledge so it should be OK. And of course
it's not all just about pay, there are also questions about conditions, but
there I'd certainly better not write about it in public.

This isn't reading like much of a gratitude piece so far. So here goes.

This afternoon we had a meeting of the local branch of our union. We barely had
a quorum: eighteen brave souls out of about seventy union members. But there was
a good feeling in the group. A small band of comrades prepared to stand up for
our rights and those of our fellow workers, in the college, around the country
and around the world.

So I am grateful for solidarity, even if it's not popular at the moment. Don't
worry: it will be again, soon enough.
