---
layout: post
title: "Freedom"
categories: Gratitude
---

I am grateful for the freedom I have to do this process in whatever way I choose.

Although I have set myself the task of finding something to be grateful for every day, and writing about it, I realised today---while an anxious teenager part of me was getting angry and frightened because I hadn't written anything and couldn't think of anything to be grateful for---that I didn't have to write here every day. That I can do this however, and whenever, I choose. It's my blog. I set the "rules" and I can break them if I choose.

What's more, my life is like that too. I can choose how to live it! Yes, that's an exclamation mark. This is a big deal. Somehow I've always felt that I didn't have a choice, that I was on railway tracks. So although this started out as a copout, as a Clayton's[^1] daily gratitude entry, I think it's actually a really important one, one for which I am truly grateful. Despite the way I've lived my life up to now, despite all the voices shouting at me in my head, I am free to live my life however I choose.

And in keeping with that, although this is the daily gratitude for Thursday the 9th, I'm writing it late at night on Sunday the 12th. So there. And anyone who objects to that can go jump.


[^1]: Clayton's was a non-alcoholic mixer drink advertised in 	Australia for a while with the slogan, "The drink you have when you're not having a drink". It entered into popular culture and language immediately. A Clayton's X is the X you have when you're not having an X. X could be anything: a haircut, a marriage, an election campaign. See <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Claytons>.